evm node monitoring (#189)
etherlinkcom/docs: docs/network/monitoring.md

A metric may provide labeled parameters which allow for different instances of the metric, with different label values.
For instance, the metric ``octez_evm_node_calls_method`` has a label name ``method`` which allows this metric to have one value for each kind of method.

```
#HELP octez_evm_node_calls_method Method call counts
#TYPE octez_evm_node_calls_method counter
octez_evm_node_calls_method{method="debug_traceTransaction"} 13594.000000
octez_evm_node_calls_method{method="eth_blockNumber"} 2.000000
...
```

Metrics provide information about the node in the form of a [gauge](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#gauge) that can increase or decrease (like the base gas price of a block),
a [counter](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#counter) that can only increase (like the number of calls to a particular method),
or a [histogram](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#histogram) used to track the size of events and how long they usually take (e.g., the time spent processing a block).

### Metrics listing

> The label value is sometimes used to store information that can't be described by the metric value (which can only be a float). This is used for example by the ``octez_evm_node_info`` metric that provides the current mode of the node.

Author: Makes sense to move that line, but I'm not sure how much details I should give about labels, they are a prometheus and grafana concept :thinking:

| time_processed                 | counter   | Time to process blocks                                                                                                 | Sequencer, observer |
| transactions                   | counter   | Number of transactions in the blocks                                                                                   | all                 |
| calls                          | summary   | RPC endpoint call counts and sum of execution times.                                                                   | all                 |
| calls_method                   | counter   | Method call counts                                                                                                     | all                 |
| tx_pool                        | gauge     | Metrics about transaction pool content (computed on demand)                                                            | sequencer           |
| inconsistent_da_fees           | counter   | Node DA fees are inconsistent with kernel ones                                                                         | sequencer           |

> | confirm_gas_needed             | counter   | Initially provided gas was not enough, confirmation was needed                                                         | sequencer           |

Author: TBH I was debating including `confirm_gas_needed` and `inconsistent_da_fees`: they are used by the dev team to evaluate and test a feature of the node, I'm not sure they make sense for anybody else. So I don't know if I should try to explain the semantics of the metrics, omit it altogether, or mention it to be exhaustive but without more details. I tried the latter in the latest version.

| blueprint_chunks_sent_on_inbox | counter   | Number of blueprint chunks sent on the shared inbox                                                                    | sequencer           |
| blueprint_chunks_sent_on_dal   | counter   | Number of blueprint chunks sent on the DAL                                                                             | sequencer           |

Some metrics have labels that store information that can't be described by the metric value (which can only be a float).
For example, the `octez_evm_node_info` metric has a label named `mode` (among others) that provides the mode of the node (RPC, observer, proxy, sequencer).

> This table shows the available labels:

Author: They seemed self explanatory to me, but they would, I've been working with them. I'll include mroe details / a description.

> This table shows the available labels:

Author: I've reworked the table a bit, and added a description

```
sudo systemctl start prometheus
```

You may visualize the log in real time to make sure the service works correctly

```
sudo journalctl --follow --unit=prometheus.service
```

#### History size

By default, Prometheus keeps 15 days of data. It may be useful to increase the history window to keep wider history. To do so, update the Prometheus service execution argument (typically, in ``/etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/prometheus.service``).
To increase the history to 30 days, simply update the following line::
```
  ExecStart=/usr/bin/prometheus $ARGS --storage.tsdb.retention 30d
```
It is also possible to limit the size of the history by adding ``--storage.tsdb.retention.size 5GB``. The first limit reached will trigger the cleanup.
You can also add ``--storage.tsdb.path <path>`` to change the path were Prometheus stores data.

There are RPCs to trigger an early garbage collection of the Prometheus data but this requires to start the Prometheus RPC server and tweak some rights. Alternatively, the easiest way to delete the whole history is to remove the output directory (typically, ``/var/lib/prometheus/metrics2/``).

> Mind restarting the Prometheus service after updating its parameters.

Author: Yes I think so (it's a shameless copy from the l1 doc) I'll rephrase to clarify.

Loki is a server that can be queried for logs, similar to what prometheus is 
for metrics. It relies on an agent to scrape and send the logs, we suggest Promtail.
Promtail will scrape the logs and push them to the Loki instance which will make
them available to the dashboard.

To install follow the [instructions on the grafana website](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/install/). 
Note that we don't discuss using the `Alloy` agent, but rather `Promtail`.
To install using a package manager, see the [install locally](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/setup/install/local/) 
section, to add the grafana package repository.

Install Loki on the graphana server and Promtail on the EVM server.

Once both are installed, you need to add the scraping job to the Promtail 
configuration file (e.g. `/etc/promtail/config.yaml`) and specify the target 
Loki server.

```
clients:
- url: <LOKI_ENDPOINT>
```

You will also need to configure a parsing pipeline for the logs.
Below is an example of a pipeline suitable for the daily logs. It uses `grep`
to extract the event's name from the log, to make searching the logs easier. 

> Alternatively, we present a method to produce logs in a json format, and the 

Author: No the JSON scraper is later, I'll include a link

> Alternatively, we present a method to produce logs in a json format, and the 

Author: link added

a [counter](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#counter) that can only increase (like the number of calls to a particular method),
or a [histogram](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#histogram) used to track the size of events and how long they usually take (e.g., the time spent processing a block).

### Metrics listing

Some of the metrics are computed when scraped from the node. As there is no rate limiter, you should consider scraping wisely and adding a proxy for a public endpoint, to limit the impact on performance.

The metric names in the table omit the namespace and subsystem for readability, so to have the full metric name you must add `octez_evm_node_`, e.g. `octez_evm_node_boostrapping`.

|             Metric names       |    Type   |                                                       Description                                                      |    Relevant mode    |
|:------------------------------:|:---------:|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:-------------------:|

> | bootstrapping                  | gauge     | 1.0 if the EVM node is catching up with its upstream EVM node, 0.0 otherwise                                           | Observer, RPC       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| bootstrapping                  | gauge     | 1.0 if the EVM node is caught up with its upstream EVM node or 0.0 if it is in the process of bootstrapping                                           | Observer, RPC       |
```
Is this "caught up with?" Seems that I get a 1.0 when my node is bootstrapped.

Author: 1 means bootstrapping, 0 means up-to-date, there might be an issue if you're node stays at 1 :thinking:

Reviewer: Interesting, I guess my node was not bootstrapped when I tested this. I changed my suggestion to match.

Author: Suggestion applied

| time_waiting                   | counter   | Time spent by a request waiting for a worker (in picosecond)                                                           | sequencer, observer |
| queue_size                     | gauge     | Size of the execution queue of simulations                                                                             | sequencer, observer |
| inconsistent_da_fees           | counter   | Node DA fees are inconsistent with kernel ones                                                                         | sequencer\*         |
| confirm_gas_needed             | counter   | Initially provided gas was not enough, confirmation was needed                                                         | sequencer\*         |

\* `inconsistent_da_fees` and `confirm_gas_needed` are listed for exhausitivity, but are mainly useful to the development team for testing and debugging the node side validation feature.

Some metrics have labels that store information that can't be described by the metric value (which can only be a float).

> For example, the `octez_evm_node_info` metric has a label named `mode` (among others) that provides the mode of the node (RPC, observer, proxy, sequencer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the `octez_evm_node_info` metric has a label named `mode` (among others) that provides the mode of the node (RPC, observer, proxy, sequencer).
Here is an example of the content from this metric with its labels:

```
octez_evm_node_info{commit_hash="99aa672c", commit_date="2024-10-29 11:53:40 +0100", mode="observer", smart_rollup_address="sr1Ghq66tYK9y3r8CC1Tf8i8m5nxh8nTvZEf"} 0.000000
```
```

This table shows the available labels:

|             Metric             |        Label(s)        |                       Description                         |
|:------------------------------:|:----------------------:|:---------------------------------------------------------:|
| information                    | commit_hash            | commit hash of the node version                           |
| information                    | commit_date            | commit date of the node version                           |
| information                    | mode                   | mode of the node (RPC, observer, sequencer, proxy)        |

> | information                    | smart_rollup_address   | address of the smartrollup monitored                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| information                    | smart_rollup_address   | address of the Smart Rollup monitored                      |
```

| calls                          | endpoint               | endpoint reached (`/`, etc.)                              |
| calls                          | method                 | JSON RPC method called (`etc_call`, etc.)                 |
| calls_method                   | method                 | JSON RPC method called (`etc_call`, etc.)                 |
| tx_pool                        | kind                   | Either `number_of_addresses` of `number_of_transactions`  |

### Scraping metrics with prometheus

> Scraping metrics gives you instant values of the metrics. For a more effective monitoring, you should create a time series of these metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scraping metrics gives you instant values of the metrics. For more effective monitoring, create a time series of these metrics.
```

We suggest using [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) for that purpose.

First, you need to install Prometheus from your favourite package manager, e.g.

```bash
sudo apt install prometheus
```

> Once installed, you need to add the scraping job to the configuration file (e.g. ``/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Prometheus is installed, add the scraping job to the configuration file, by default `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.
```

```yaml
- job_name: 'octez-evm-node-exporter'
  scrape_interval: <interval> s
  metrics_path: "/metrics"
  static_configs:
    - targets: ['<addr>:<port>']
```

> For instance, a typical target address can be ``localhost:8545``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the EVM node exposes its JSON RPC API endpoint to `localhost:8545`.
```

If you plan to also use Prometheus Node Exporter (as described [below](#hardware-metrics), you should also add:

```yaml
- job_name: 'node-exporter'
  scrape_interval: <interval> s
  static_configs:
    - targets: ['<addr>:<port>']
```

> For instance, a typical target address may be ``localhost:9100``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, a typical target address may be `localhost:9100`.
```

Note that Prometheus can also scrape metrics from several nodes.

Prometheus is a service, so you need to start it:

```bash
sudo systemctl start prometheus
```

> You may visualize the log in real time to make sure the service works correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may visualize the log in real time to make sure the service works correctly:
```

```bash
sudo journalctl --follow --unit=prometheus.service
```

#### History size

> By default, Prometheus keeps 15 days of data. It may be useful to increase the history window to keep wider history. To do so, update the Prometheus service execution argument (typically, in ``/etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/prometheus.service``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Prometheus keeps 15 days of data. It may be useful to increase the history window to keep wider history. To do so, update the Prometheus service execution argument (typically, in `/etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/prometheus.service`).
```

To increase the history to 30 days, simply update the following line:
```
  ExecStart=/usr/bin/prometheus $ARGS --storage.tsdb.retention 30d
```

> It is also possible to limit the size of the history by adding ``--storage.tsdb.retention.size 5GB``. The first limit reached will trigger the cleanup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also possible to limit the size of the history by adding `--storage.tsdb.retention.size 5GB`. The first limit reached will trigger the cleanup.
```

> You can also add ``--storage.tsdb.path <path>`` to change the path were Prometheus stores data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also add `--storage.tsdb.path <path>` to change the path were Prometheus stores data.
```

> There are RPCs to trigger an early garbage collection of the Prometheus data but this requires you to start the Prometheus RPC server and tweak some rights. Alternatively, the easiest way to delete the whole history is to remove the output directory (typically, ``/var/lib/prometheus/metrics2/``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are RPCs to trigger an early garbage collection of the Prometheus data but this requires you to start the Prometheus RPC server and tweak some rights. Alternatively, the easiest way to delete the whole history is to remove the output directory (typically, `/var/lib/prometheus/metrics2/`).
```

| blueprint_chunks_sent_on_dal   | counter   | Number of blueprint chunks sent on the DAL                                                                             | sequencer           |
| signals_sent                   | counter   | Number of DAL import signals sent on the inbox                                                                         | sequencer, observer |
| time_waiting                   | counter   | Time spent by a request waiting for a worker (in picosecond)                                                           | sequencer, observer |
| queue_size                     | gauge     | Size of the execution queue of simulations                                                                             | sequencer, observer |
| inconsistent_da_fees           | counter   | Node DA fees are inconsistent with kernel ones                                                                         | sequencer\*         |
| confirm_gas_needed             | counter   | Initially provided gas was not enough, confirmation was needed                                                         | sequencer\*         |

> \* `inconsistent_da_fees` and `confirm_gas_needed` are listed for exhausitivity, but are mainly useful to the development team for testing and debugging the node side validation feature.

Author: I kind of agree on principle, but they are currently present, and publicly available, and will be seen if you check /metrics manually to check as the doc suggests.

| tx_pool                        | kind                   | Either `number_of_addresses` of `number_of_transactions`  |

### Scraping metrics with prometheus

Scraping metrics gives you instant values of the metrics. For more effective monitoring, create a time series of these metrics.

We suggest using [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) for that purpose.

First, you need to install Prometheus from your favourite package manager, e.g.

```bash
sudo apt install prometheus
```

When Prometheus is installed, add the scraping job to the configuration file, by default `/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml`.

```yaml
- job_name: 'octez-evm-node-exporter'
  scrape_interval: <interval> s
  metrics_path: "/metrics"
  static_configs:
    - targets: ['<addr>:<port>']
```

By default, the EVM node exposes its JSON RPC API endpoint to `localhost:8545`.

If you plan to also use Prometheus Node Exporter (as described [below](#hardware-metrics), you should also add:

```yaml
- job_name: 'node-exporter'
  scrape_interval: <interval> s
  static_configs:
    - targets: ['<addr>:<port>']
```

For instance, a typical target address may be `localhost:9100`.

> 

Author: Makes sense.

```

## Logs

The node outputs logs in the `<DATA_DIR>/daily_logs` directory for major events
(such as block production, connection to rollup node, etc) and a separate set of
logs for the inner working of the internal EVM (or, more precisely, the kernel)
in the `<DATA_DIR>/kernel_logs`. 

The standards logs are output in files with a daily rotation and a retention 
period of 5 days. They are limited to `INFO` and `ERROR` by default, but the 
EVM node can be started with the option `--verbose` for more.

```
...
2024-11-01T23:59:54.999-00:00 [evm_node.dev.evm_events_follower_upstream_blueprint_applied] The rollup node kernel applied blueprint 505715 leading to creating block 0xa33824839766bea9eb16e3cfb6a3e06fd5aedae1d19e50729f1575892[...].
2024-11-01T23:59:59.598-00:00 [evm_node.dev.blueprint_application] Applied a blueprint for level 505719 at 2024-11-01T23:59:59Z containing 0 transactions for 0 gas leading to creating block 0xe09fcee34c4f3fb7ac701e0508fadac7264cf7e595621a1d69d4dc533[...].
...
```

The EVM logs are stored in different files according to the context of the EVM call: creating blocks, simulation, validation of a transaction before inclusion in the tx pool, etc.

> 

Author: makes sense

---

> Title: Monitoring Etherlink nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Monitoring Etherlink nodes
```

This needs to be lowercase.

logs for the inner working of the internal EVM (or, more precisely, the kernel)
in the `<DATA_DIR>/kernel_logs`. 

The standards logs are output in files with a daily rotation and a retention 
period of 5 days. They are limited to `INFO` and `ERROR` by default, but the 
EVM node can be started with the option `--verbose` for more.

```
...
2024-11-01T23:59:54.999-00:00 [evm_node.dev.evm_events_follower_upstream_blueprint_applied] The rollup node kernel applied blueprint 505715 leading to creating block 0xa33824839766bea9eb16e3cfb6a3e06fd5aedae1d19e50729f1575892[...].
2024-11-01T23:59:59.598-00:00 [evm_node.dev.blueprint_application] Applied a blueprint for level 505719 at 2024-11-01T23:59:59Z containing 0 transactions for 0 gas leading to creating block 0xe09fcee34c4f3fb7ac701e0508fadac7264cf7e595621a1d69d4dc533[...].
...
```

The EVM logs are stored in different files according to the context of the EVM call: creating blocks, simulation, validation of a transaction before inclusion in the tx pool, etc.

|              File             |                  Usage                 |
|:-----------------------------:|:--------------------------------------:|

> | daily_logs/daily-YYYYMMDD.log | Major events                           |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| daily_logs/daily-YYYYMMDD.log | Major node events                           |
```

### Adding log sinks

The EVM Node uses the same [logging features](https://tezos.gitlab.io/user/logging.html#file-descriptor-sinks)
as the [octez node](https://tezos.gitlab.io/). It is possible to add new 
`sinks` using [environment variables](https://tezos.gitlab.io/user/logging.html#environment-variables).

For example, the following definition will add logs in json format, with a 
daily rotation, 4 file retention, with `rw-r-----` unix rights, in the 
(fictional) `/some/data/dir/json_daily_logs` directory.

```
TEZOS_EVENTS_CONFIG="file-descriptor-path:///some/data/dir/json_daily_logs/daily.log?daily-logs=4&format=one-per-line&create-dirs=true&chmod=0o640"
```

This will result in files containing one json object per line.
```
...
{"fd-sink-item.v0":{"hostname":"etherlink-pinata-sequencer","time_stamp":1730505587.606614,"section":["evm_node","dev"],"event":{"blueprint_injection.v0":"505717"}}}
{"fd-sink-item.v0":{"hostname":"etherlink-pinata-sequencer","time_stamp":1730505590.115897,"section":["evm_node","dev"],"event":{"evm_events_follower_upstream_blueprint_applied.v0":{"level":"505714","hash":"0xfb6f61fe268481f1d18d31d7567011065418379b34722e83c517a6c509d3dfdb"}}}}
...
```

> Such files can be scraped using the following Promtail configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such files can be scraped using the following Promtail configuration.
This will create a json event containing only the `event` of each log line.
```
